Update local relay and parachain tutorials (#1140)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs: content/md/en/docs/tutorials/connect-other-chains/parachain.md

---
title: Connect a local parachain
description:
keywords:
  - parachain
  - testnet
  - local
  - collator
  - chain specification
---

> In this tutorial, we'll connect a parachain to a local relay chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll connect a parachain to a local relay chain.
```

## Tutorial objectives

By completing this tutorial, you will accomplish the following objectives:

> - Register a para ID for your parachain on a relay chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Register a para ID for your parachain on a relay chain.
```

> - Start block production of a parachain on a relay chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Start block production of a parachain on a relay chain.
```

## Before you begin

Before you begin, verify the following:

- You have competed the [start a local relay chain](/tutorials/connect-other-chains/local-testnet/) tutorial, and have a running local network with no les than two validators.

> ## Matching versions are critical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> You **must** use the _exact_ software versions defined in the [relay chain tutorial](/tutorials/connect-other-chains/local-relay/#matching-versions-are-critical) for this tutorial to function!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You have the specific software versions defined in the [Prepare a local parachain testnet](/tutorials/connect-other-chains/local-relay/#matching-versions-are-critical).
```

> For example, if you are using [Polkadot `release-v0.9.24`](https://github.com/paritytechtree/release-v0.9.24), use the `polkadot-v0.9.24` version of the [parachain template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template/tree/polkadot-v0.9.24).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, if you are using [Polkadot `release-v0.9.24`](https://github.com/paritytechtree/release-v0.9.24), use the `polkadot-v0.9.24` version of the [parachain template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template/tree/polkadot-v0.9.24).
```

## Building the parachain template

> We will use the [Substrate parachain template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template) to launch a parachain on your local relay chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses the [Substrate parachain template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template) to launch a parachain on your local relay chain.
```

The parachain template is similar to the [node template](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-node-template) used in solo chain development, so it should be quite familiar.

> Later, we will use this parachain template as the starting point for developing our own parachains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Later, you'll use this parachain template as the starting point for developing your own parachains.
```

<!-- TODO NEW CONTENT -->
<!-- See the guide on [converting a solo chain to a parachain](/reference/how-to-guides/parachains/convert) for details on how the parachain template was created, and how to convert your chain's logic (not state migrations!) to a parachain.** -->

> 

Reviewer: I'd prefer you to use real steps.

Author: Not sure what you mean in the context of a new HTG ...?

Author: https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs/issues/1147

In a new terminal window:

```bash
# Clone the parachain template
git clone --depth 1 --branch polkadot-v0.9.24 https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template

# Switch into the parachain template directory
cd substrate-parachain-template

# Checkout the proper commit
git checkout polkadot-v0.9.24

# Build the parachain template collator
cargo b -r
```

> **After you start the compilation, it will take a while (commonly 15 to 60 minuets) to complete.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compiling the node can take 15 to 60 minuets.
```

> In the mean time, [Reserve a para ID](#reserve-a-para-id) on the running relay chain to prepare, and make not of the `ParaID` you acquire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Why not?

> If still waiting, take a moment to explore the runtime of the [parachain template runtime](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template/blob/polkadot-v0.9.24/runtime/src/lib.rs) you have locally now, to understand what pallets are included within it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This bounce away seems weird to me.

Reviewer: --STOPPED HERE--
